The chrXY Benchmark v1.0 README was generated YYYY-MM-DD by Jennifer McDaniel, NIST.

GENERAL INFORMATION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Title of Dataset
HG002 Chromosome X and Y benchmark

### Background
Benchmark developed from T2T HG002 complete assembly of chromosomes X and Y.  This benchmark
includes more challenging regions, like segmental duplications, that were excluded 
from previous GIAB benchmarks.  

###  Principal Investigator(s)
Name: Justin M. Zook  
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  
Email: jzook@nist.gov

### Dataset Contact(s)
Name: Justin Wagner  
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  
Email: justin.wagner@nist.gov

Name: Jennifer McDaniel   
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  
Email: jennifer.mcdaniel@nist.gov

### Dates of Data Collection
[MM-DD-YYYY to MM-DD-YYYY]

SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Licenses/restrictions placed on the data, or limitations of reuse: 
See NIST license and data use policy at the end of the document.

### Recommended citation for the data:
	T2T Xy assembly

### Links to publicly accessible locations of the data:
	link to ftp
	link of t2t xy v2.7 assembly

- [NIH hosted GIAB ftp site](https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/data_somatic/HG008/Liss_lab)
	[Document names for subdirectories with sequencing and analysis data]

DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### File Types and Descriptions:
SmallVariant/
HG002_GRCh38_chrXY_smallvar_v1.0.bed : bed file with small variant benchmark regions.
HG002_GRCh38_chrXY_smallvar_v1.0.vcf.gz : bgzipped vcf file with benchmark small variants.
Supplementary/
	HG002-T2T-XY-align2-GRCh38/
   * `*-report.html`: snakemake report with dipcall pipeline run information.
   * `*.dip.bed`: BED file with fully diploid assembled regions generated by dipcall.
   * `*.dip.vcf.gz`: bgzipped vcf with combined phased small and structural variants generated by dipcall
   * `*.dip.vcf.gz.tbi`: index file for `*.dip.vcf.gz`
   * `*.hap1.bam`: dipcall generated BAM file with paternal haplotype aligned to the reference.
   * `*.hap2.bam`: dipcall generated BAM file with maternal haplotype aligned to the reference.
   * `*.bai`: index file for `*.hap1.bam` or `*.hap2.bam`.

	contributed_callsets/
   * `*.vcf.gz`: variant call files received from collaborators using their preferred variant caller. 

### File List with md5s:


METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAMPLE ID(s):  [Provide internal sample IDs as a quick reference for readers if they are used in methods descriptions.]

### Provenance Information
[Please include this information if only performing analysis. In order to enhance transparency, provide detailed information regarding the input files utilized to generate the dataset(s), e.g. fastq, bam, etc.  This information will help to make clear where the data came from to show provenance.] 


### SEQUENCING METHODS
|                                |  			                                                                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Library Preparation            | [Provide information on library preparation method including kit, catalog ID and version information ]                                                             |
| Platform                       | [What technology was used to acquire sequencing data? e.g. company and platform]                                                                                   |
| Sequencing Method/Chemistry    | [Describe sequencing method and chemistry. Include kit names/numbers, versions, paired/single end, read length or any other information relevant to the technology.|

### MAPPING METHODS
|                   |          |
|-------------------|----------|
| Mapping Method    | [Method used for mapping. e.g. software, version]   			                                     |
| Reference         | Reference used to map reads, e.g. GRCh38. Provide link to were reference can be obtained 			 |
| QC metrics        | [Method used for QC of mapped data. e.g. software, version]                                        |
| Coverage Normal   | [If applicable, observed coverage of tumor data.]                                                  |
| Coverage Tumor    | [If applicable, observed coverage of normal data.]                                                 |

[Ensure methods are presented in a manner that promotes transparency and allows for a clear understanding of process(es).  This information should include, but is not limited to: software with version, code, parameters and references.  Organize this section in a manner that is consistent with how data is presented in the file list(s).]

### VARIANT CALLING METHODS
[Ensure methods are presented in a manner that promotes transparency and allows for a clear understanding of process(es).  This information should include, but is not limited to: software with version, code, parameters and references.  Organize this section in a manner that is consistent with how data is presented in the file list(s).]

### Quality Assurance Practices
[Provide information on any validation processes that were performed on the data to validate data completeness and correctness.] 


NIST Data Use Policy
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This data/work was created by employees of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), an agency of the Federal Government. Pursuant to title 17 United States Code Section 105, works of NIST employees are not subject to copyright protection in the United States.  This data/work may be subject to foreign copyright.

The data/work is provided by NIST as a public service and is expressly provided “AS IS.” NIST MAKES NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT AND DATA ACCURACY. NIST does not warrant or make any representations regarding the use of the data or the results thereof, including but not limited to the correctness, accuracy, reliability or usefulness of the data. NIST SHALL NOT BE LIABLE AND YOU HEREBY RELEASE NIST FROM LIABILITY FOR ANY INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, SPECIAL, OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF BUSINESS PROFITS, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, LOSS OF BUSINESS INFORMATION, AND THE LIKE), WHETHER ARISING IN TORT, CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM OR RELATING TO THE DATA (OR THE USE OF OR INABILITY TO USE THIS DATA), EVEN IF NIST HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

To the extent that NIST may hold copyright in countries other than the United States, you are hereby granted the non-exclusive irrevocable and unconditional right to print, publish, prepare derivative works and distribute the NIST data, in any medium, or authorize others to do so on your behalf, on a royalty-free basis throughout the world.

You may improve, modify, and create derivative works of the data or any portion of the data, and you may copy and distribute such modifications or works. Modified works should carry a notice stating that you changed the data and should note the date and nature of any such change. Please explicitly acknowledge the National Institute of Standards and Technology as the source of the data:  Data citation recommendations are provided at https://www.nist.gov/open/license.

Permission to use this data is contingent upon your acceptance of the terms of this agreement and upon your providing appropriate acknowledgments of NIST’s creation of the data/work.
